Disproof

The article contains a variety of misleading claims, confusing established facts and opinions and versions.
So far, scientists have proven that the new coronavirus could not have had been created in a lab.
In Nature medicine magazine, scientists entirely disproved the idea that this virus resulted from a laboratory manipulation.
In the study, the researchers examined what could be deduced from the original coronavirus SARS-CoV-2, working with a comparative analysis of genetic data.
In the article, they describe the notable characteristics of its genome and discuss the scenarios in which it could reproduce.
Their analyses clearly show that the SARS-CoV-2 is not a laboratory construction or a deliberately manipulated virus and is of animal origin.
The research results are supported by leading research institutions in the world.
The Indian scientists to which Life.Ru refers, retracted their own article, previously published as a preprint:

"This paper has been withdrawn by its authors.
They intend to revise it in response to comments received from the research community on their technical approach and their interpretation of the results.
If you have any questions, please contact the corresponding author".
The claim that discussing a possible pandemic in 2015, over the struggle with Ebola, or supporting such discussions in 2019, when may reveal Bill Gates planned to create it himself, is not supported by any evidence.
The host of the talks in 2019, the Johns Hopkins Center for Health Security, issued a clarification: "the exercise served to highlight preparedness and response challenges that would likely arise in a very severe pandemic.
We are not now predicting that the nCoV-2019 outbreak will kill 65 million people".
Bill Gates, speaking to Chinese CC TV, explained that he intended to do his best; to get the world ready and invest billions of USD for the world's preparation for diseases causing pandemics and "crazy rumours" emerged during the current difficult times.
Georges Soros' "link" to the coronavirus is a speculation.
Life.Ru did not say which lab Soros is allegedly financing, proposing to follow the link to Zvesda Channel which does not name a particular laboratory either (Zvezda notes only, that the address of this lab "reminds of an Apocalypse").
As Conspiracy Watch notes, in 2011, Georges Soros had minor investments in WuXiAppTech (now WuXi Pharma Tech Inc.), to which any link to coronavirus is not proven.
See other Rusian disinformation media claims on George Soros and Bill Gates, as well as more false narratives on coronavirus and their debunking.
