The Daily Star's FREE newsletter is spectacular!
Sign up today for the best stories straight to your inbox Invalid Email Something went wrong, please try again later.
Sign up today!
Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice





CORRECTION: An earlier version of this article claimed a laboratory near Wuhan could be to blame for the outbreak of coronavirus.
This has since been disputed, with the source said to be an animal market

China's deadly coronavirus outbreak was linked to a secret lab created to study the world's most dangerous diseases, insiders claimed.
The maximum-security bioweapons lab named the National Biosafety Laboratory, was opened in 2017 in Wuhan, where the first cases of the virus were reported last month.
Chinese cities have now been placed on lockdown to control the spread of the disease as over 25 people were confirmed to have died.
Wuhan has already been closed off, while the nearby city of Huanggang with a population of around six million now under quarantine.
Major train stations have been closed off in the city of Ezhou ahead of the Chinese New Year celebrations.
However Politfact.com says the claims are 'baseless', saying there is no evidence to support the claim.
(Image: Wuhan Virology Institute)

Reporting on the lab's opening in February 2017, the journal nature.com reported: "A laboratory in Wuhan is on the cusp of being cleared to work with the world's most dangerous pathogens."
The article went on: "Some scientists outside China worry about pathogens escaping, and the addition of a biological dimension to geopolitical tensions between China and other nations."
It added that the lab would "focus on the control of emerging diseases," as well as "store purified viruses".
The lab was also said to have created to "study the pathogen that causes SARS," a virus similar to coronavirus which broke out in China in 2002.
Writing on the site Disclose.TV, one commenter said: "Putting a bioweapons research facility near a thriving metropolis of 10 million... that's about as dumb as putting Plum Island lab outside of NYC."
They added: "I've heard people saying it's a possible bioweapon that's been unleashed on accident, it would make sense considering all the precautions they are taking on the city.
(Image: AFP via Getty Images)

"The entire city is locked down, no travel in or out allowed."
However the sources of the outbreak is said to be at a seafood and animal market in Wuhan - not a lab.
Commenting on the high death rate, they said: "17 out of 500 is a fairly high mortality rate.
Thousands of times more than the flu."
The cause of the coronavirus outbreak is still unknown, with a number of possible suggestions being made, inclsuinf

(Image: REUTERS)

Yesterday, coronavirus was linked to bats after the first cases were traced back to a food market in the city.
Scientists said the flying mammals could host the virus.
The outbreak has also been linked to eating venomous snakes, which were also seen at the food market.
Today, the UK government responded to the coronavirus outbreak, with a number of steps including the ending of direct flights from Wuhan to Heathrow Airport.
