CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Casually picking up a package and bringing it into the house could pose a threat during the coronavirus pandemic.
So how do you protect yourself when you’re ordering necessities online?
It’s all about cleaning the packaging.
“One thing we have to realize is that there isn’t some kind of machine that is processing packages,” Case Western Reserve University’s Shanina Knighton said.
“These are people.
There are people that work inside of these warehouses, there are people that will come into contact with these packages.”
Knighton, a nurse and researcher who studies hygiene, said the people who worked with these packages could be sick -- whether its with the flu or COVID-19 -- and taking the right precautions could help stop the spread of germs.
Online retailers like Amazon have warned customers about delays in delivery because of coronavirus.
At Amazon, the company has prioritized quick delivery and restock of household staples, sanitizers, baby formula, and medical supplies.
UPS and FedEx both have stopped requiring signatures for package delivery to practice social distancing.
Preliminary research has shown that the virus can live on cardboard for up to 24 hours, and 3 days on plastic and steel.
Do you need to put on gloves before picking up these packages or opening them?
Knighton says no.
Besides the fact that hospitals are struggling with a shortage of protective equipment due to the pandemic, often people at home don’t use them correctly: They don’t wash their hands before and after donning the gloves, put them on incorrectly or touch other things while wearing the gloves.
So how can you protect yourself?
Here are steps you can take to keep yourself safe, whether you’re buying toys or toilet paper.
Step 1: Designate a delivery zone outside the house.
Maybe it’s a crate or a mat with a sign for delivery workers.
This way you know where package is and you can limit face-to-face contact.
Step 2: Bring a disinfectant wipe, spray or wet rag with sanitizer on it to quickly wipe the box or package before bringing it inside.
Or, open the box outside and discard the packaging.
(Remember: Don’t touch your face with your hands until you’ve washed your hands.)
Step 3: Designate a particular surface where you open packages, if you choose to do so inside.
A hard surface which can be sanitized easily is ideal.
Knighton said this way, you know exactly which surface you need to regularly clean.
Step 4: Wipe down the next layer of plastic or box with sanitizer before putting the item away or using it.
Step 5: Wash your hands.
