We’re tracking the top myths about COVID-19 — and the more than 427 websites spreading them.
As COVID-19 pandemic continues to spread across the globe, so does disinformation and misinformation about the disease.
From false cures to conspiracy theories about the virus’ origin to misinformation about the vaccine, myths about COVID-19 can have dangerous and real-world consequences.
Follow the spread of this dangerous information with NewsGuard’s Coronavirus Misinformation Tracking Center.
On this page, NewsGuard’s team of journalists is tracking the top myths about COVID-19 and the COVID-19 vaccine and cataloguing the number of websites spreading those myths.
As of our latest update, NewsGuard so far has identified 427 websites publishing misinformation about COVID-19 in the U.S., U.K., France, Germany and Italy.
Researchers, platforms, advertertisers, governmental bodies, and health institutions interested in licensing the list can contact us for licensing information.
Websites on the list include publishers notorious for publishing false health content, political sites whose embrace of conspiracy theories extends well beyond politics, and new sites that were created specifically to spread misinformation about COVID-19.
Among the myths published by the websites are false claims that drinking bleach or colloidal silver will cure the virus, false claims that the COVID-19 vaccine will change patient’s DNA or implant a tracking microchip, and false claims that methods like masks and social distancing are ineffective in slowing the spread of the virus.
The COVID-19 Misinformation Tracking Center is a work in progress about a story that has new developments daily.
If you have come across a false story about COVID-19, please report it here or contact us via our misinformation hotline.
For more information about NewsGuard’s approach to tracking coronavirus misinformation, read this piece on the topic from our lead health analyst, listen to this story on NPR, or watch this segment with the BBC.
For reliable information on the COVID-19 virus, consult the websites of public health institutions such as the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the World Health Organization.
Websites Identified Publishing False Coronavirus Information: 427
United States: 268
United Kingdom: 16
France: 55
Germany: 34
Italy: 40
Other: 14
Top COVID-19 Vaccine Myths
Scientists and researchers managed to produce vaccines to protect against COVID-19.
Vaccine candidates have recently been approved in some countries and are in the approval process in others, yet misinformation about the safety and effects of any future vaccine is already threatening its rollout.
On our Top COVID-19 Vaccine Myths tracker, we catalogue the top myths about a COVID-19 vaccine that have appeared in NewsGuard’s ratings of more than 6,000 news and information sites worldwide.
COVID-19 Myths: False Cures, Conspiracy Theories, and More
During the initial spread of COVID-19, a number of myths spread pushing conspiracy theories about the virus’ origins and false “cures” and treatments for the virus.
This list of top COVID-19 myths covers the most prominent of those theories and how they initially emerged.
Last updated April 7, 2021
