For centuries, elderberry has been used as an herbal remedy to boost immunity and help treat cold and flu symptoms.
Should we then consider using it as a supplement to prevent or fight off COVID-19?
What is elderberry?
Elderberry is a black berry from the Sambucus tree that is native to Europe but now grows all around the world.
Elderberries are very tart and must be cooked to be eaten, as uncooked elderberries can cause cyanide toxicity.
You can buy it in the form of capsules, lozenges, gummies or syrups.
Or you can boil the dried berries and make your own homemade elderberry syrup.
How does it boost immunity?
Elderberry is high in vitamin C and packed with antioxidants, such as polyphenols (also found in wine, berries, and chocolate).
By supplementing the body with antioxidants, we can boost our natural immune response.
Elderberry may improve cold and flu symptoms.
In a review of 4 studies with 180 people, elderberry has been shown to have antibacterial and antiviral properties and can help fight upper respiratory symptoms caused by viral infections.
Other studies have shown that taking elderberry syrup daily when sick can help shorten the duration and severity of colds.
In a study of 60 adults with influenza, those who took elderberry syrup four times per day saw symptoms clear up on average four days earlier than those who took a placebo syrup (syrup with no elderberry).
A 2016 study of 312 air travellers taking elderberry three times per day found that those who got sick had a shorter duration of illness and less severe symptoms.
Can it help fight COVID-19?
Due to its antiviral properties, elderberry may help prevent the early stages of coronavirus infections, including COVID-19.
But since COVID-19 is a brand new virus, there isn’t any established research directly on this virus.
So, we can look at the effects of elderberry on other coronaviruses with similar structure and function.
Without sounding too ‘science-y’, here are two ways elderberry can fight coronaviruses:
Elderberry stops the attachment of the virus to the ACE-2 receptor on our cells, essentially blocking viral entry into the cell.
If the virus can’t get into our cells, it can’t replicate or spread, and therefore, can’t survive.
Viruses have a lipid coating on them.
Elderberry breaks down the virus’s lipid membrane, which kills the virus.
This is also how washing your hands is so effective, as the soap breaks up this lipid coating.
Although these theories are interesting to consider, more research is needed before we can make any conclusive statements about elderberry and COVID-19.
Are there any risks?
There has been some misinformation circulating on the internet about elderberry causing a ‘cytokine storm’ in COVID-19 patients.
A cytokine storm is when the body produces way too many tiny immune cells called cytokines that can lead to your immune system going into overdrive, causing serious organ damage.
As a part of its immunity boosting action, elderberry does increase the release of cytokines, which causes minor inflammation.
However, this is part of a normal immune response to fight infection.
There is no evidence showing that elderberry can trigger a cytokine storm.
In conclusion
Elderberry has been used for hundreds of years to help treat colds and flus due to is antibacterial and antiviral properties.
It can prevent early infection of coronaviruses, although it has not yet been evaluated for treating or preventing COVID-19 specifically.
It’s important to note that some of the studies on elderberry were performed by supplement companies, so it’s possible that negative results may be downplayed.
The bottom line is this: while taking elderberry extract won’t hurt, we shouldn’t be relying on natural products and ‘immunity boosters’ for COVID-19 prevention.
The best way to prevent COVID-19 infection is through proper hand hygiene and social distancing.
Have YOU ever used elderberry products to prevent or treat cold and flu symptoms?
Let me know in the comments!
