Breaking news: China will admit coronavirus coming from its P4 lab
Last updated on Feb 3, 2020: Miles Guo identified the Chinese scientist “Deyin Guo” to be the person who created the Wuhan Coronavirus.
Wang Quishan, the vice president of China, ordered this attack.
Now the Chinese Communist Party is blaming the U.S. for creating Wuhan coronavirus.
Please click on the link below to read the last news.
The Chinese Communist Party will finally admit that the real source of the coronavirus is from “a lab in Wuhan” linked to its covert biological weapon programs.
As the “novel” coronavirus originated in Wuhan is spreading to ten countries, more and more people including international bio-weapon experts are questioning its link to the Wuhan P4 lab located about 20 miles from a seafood market where the first few cases of human infections were found.
A reliable source, one of the Chinese kleptocrats, told Miles Guo today that the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) will admit to the public of an “accidental” leak of lab-created virus from a P4 lab in Wuhan to put blames on “human errors”.
But the official announcement is still being finalized.
Initially, the Chinese communist’s propaganda machines were blaming the virus on wild animals like bats by showing many videos of people eating bats.
(Please click here to view the bat-eating images which are too disturbing to be shown here. )
In January 2018, a bio-safety level four (BSL-4) laboratory was built in the city of Wuhan, which focuses on the control of emerging diseases and stores purified SARS and other types of viruses.
It is supposed to act as a WHO ‘reference laboratory’ linked to similar labs around the world.
Here is a Chinese video of the P4 lab which took over ten years to build:
The remaining question is whether the Chinese Communist Party leaked the virus on purpose as a desperate attempt to stay in power.
There is no final conclusion yet, but the Chinese Communist Party acted suspiciously before, during and after the first case of Wuhan pneumonia:
Wang Qishan visited Wuhan secretly during the time of the first “sign” of the deadly virus.
The Chinese top kleptocrats like Han Zheng did not respond to any early reports of the mysterious Wuhan pneumonia sent by the government of Hubei province.
The Chinese government deliberately covered up and delayed the reporting and containment of the mysterious pneumonia.
and the reporting and containment of the mysterious pneumonia.
The Chinese kleptocrat Wang Qishan, the Vice President of China, told his friend confidently that the outbreak would end in February while the epidemic is spreading out of control.
The Chinese government deliberately abandon the residents, patients and medical staff at the epicenter without providing food, medical supplies or protective gear.
the residents, patients and medical staff at the epicenter without providing food, medical supplies or protective gear.
The Chinese top kleptocrats handle the outbreak with a nonchalant attitude.
Instead of talking or acting in ways to show concerns, they were celebrating Chinese New Year as if nothing has happened.
attitude.
Instead of talking or acting in ways to show concerns, they were celebrating Chinese New Year as if nothing has happened.
The Chinese government has not done a lot to reduce the spread of the disease except for sending military forces to prevent people from escaping their cities or villages on lockdown.
The Chinese government allows the fear to spread nationally and internationally to create an almost doomsday-like scene.
to spread nationally and internationally to create an almost doomsday-like scene.
The Chinese government rejected aid, monitoring, donation or assistance from the WHO to keep the epidemic in a black box.
Please watch the following videos for Mr. Guo Wengui’s analysis of the communist party’s evil plot:
Please follow GNews for the latest updates on coronavirus epidemic and other news about China.
To join Chinese and English discussion in Discord App with close to 30K anti-Chinese-Communist members around the world, please visit http://vog.media
