(Natural News) Three of the evilest entities on the planet were charged in a Peruvian court the other day of conspiring to create the Wuhan coronavirus (COVID-19) for world domination.
Bill Gates, George Soros, and several members of the Rockefeller family were deemed responsible for the advent and spread of the Chinese virus, which has killed tens of thousands of small businesses and forever changed the world for the worst.
The Chicha and Pisco Criminal Appeals Chamber decided that the ever-dreaded Chinese germs were the product of “criminal elite around the world” – mostly multi-billionaires with global depopulation on their minds.
These defendants had tried to appeal, but Judges Tito Gallego, Luis Legia, and Tony Changarei issued a delay, justifying it due to the “unpredictable” nature of the “pandemic.”
It was only predictable for ordinary people, however, as the alleged creators of the Wuhan coronavirus (COVID-19) “who have been involved in it and continue to manage it with particular secrecy in their environment” are entirely unaffected.
In fact, Bill Gates has never once been seen wearing a face mask, nor is he willing to take the vaccines he is now pushing everyone else to get for their “safety” and “protection” against the WuFlu.
“No world government, individuals or legal entities, nor the defense of the accused can claim that this pandemic has the quality of ‘foresight,’ except for the creators of the new world order, such as Bill Gates, Soros, Rockefeller, etc.,” the magistrates wrote in their resolution, which was posted to the LP Law portal.
Time to prosecute Bill Gates, George Soros and the Rockefellers
One does not have to read much between the lines to see that these Peruvian judges get it.
The plandemic is nothing more than a scam that was hatched by the worst kinds of criminals this world has ever seen; those with lots of money and a penchant for genocide.
Beyond a shadow of a doubt, Gates et al.
funded and created the Wuhan coronavirus (COVID-19) for nefarious purposes – or as the court put it, the Chinese virus was “created by a criminal elite that rules the world.”
The document specifically names billionaire financier and globalist agitator George Soros, Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates, and the entire Rockefeller family as criminals who are guilty of “managing” and “continuing to direct” the virus straight into the “new world order.”
If only our own criminal justice system would take the same approach, then perhaps we could finally put an end to all the lockdowns, mask-wearing and superstitious paranoia that has brainwashed millions of our own people.
Even better, we could finally try Gates et al.
for their many crimes against humanity and punish them accordingly.
Meanwhile, in lieu of justice, Gates is already planning for the next plandemic, warning those who actually listen to what he has to say that this is war.
“We can’t afford to be caught flat-footed again,” the whiny geek is quoted as saying.
“To prevent the hardship of this last year from happening again, pandemic preparedness must be taken as seriously as we take the threat of war.”
The problem for Gates, of course, is that he is the enemy in that war, and someone we should all band together to see dealt with under the law for our collective benefit.
Whether right, left, or somewhere in between, all Americans have a stake in seeing Gates and his co-conspirators locked up forever, at the very least.
Humanity does not stand a chance if they are allowed to continue roaming free to commit even more atrocities.
If this story piqued your interest, you will find more like it at Pandemic.news.
Sources for this article include:
VerietyInfo.com
NaturalNews.com
SeattleTimes.com
